# Getting Started

---

## Getting Started with NGEN

To get started with NGEN, simply connect it to a computer or another USB-host device via USB, or to a MIDI-capable device via the MIDI Out jack.

The [MIDI Clock](clockgen.md#midi-clock) generator is active by default, so NGEN should be ready to receive MIDI Clock from a DAW or external gear to NGEN. 

By default, all 16 tracks are set up to output MIDI to channels 1 through 16 sequentially however only the first track is active when the device is turned on (more tracks can be enabled via the [Track Settings](track.md#track-settings)). 


!!! warning "Attention - ADVANCED MODE"
      Many advanced settings (such as track routing and Clock Rate) are hidden by default to provide a more streamlined experience to new users.   
      To access these settings, enable the "Advanced Mode" in the [Settings](settings.md) / General page.  
      To keep your current settings, save your settings after enabling Advanced Mode.

---


## Step-By-Step Guide

This guide provides a step-by-step process to initiate NGEN:

### 1 - Connecting NGEN to your setup

In this first section, you'll learn how to connect NGEN to your setup and use it to sequence 1 instrument using the ACDGEN generator.

1. Establish a connection between NGEN and a [computer](setup.md#connecting-via-usb) or a [MIDI](setup.md#connecting-via-midi)-enabled hardware instrument. If you do not intend to use NGEN with a computer, you can [power the unit externally](setup.md#powering-ngen-externally).

2. Configure your MIDI instrument or destination to receive MIDI notes on Channel #1:

      1. If you're utilizing NGEN with a computer, launch your preferred DAW, create an instrument/MIDI track, load a virtual instrument, and set it to receive MIDI from NGEN's Channel 1.

      2. If you're employing a hardware synthesizer, ensure it's configured to receive MIDI on Channel 1.

3. Initiate one of NGEN's [Clock Generators](clockgen.md):

      1. If you wish to synchronize NGEN to a MIDI Clock from your DAW or instrument, ensure they're configured to output MIDI Clock to NGEN via USB or the MIDI IN jack.
      
      2. If you prefer to use NGEN's internal clock, navigate to the [Main Menu](menunavigation.md#main-menu), proceed to the Clock sub-menu, hold the ++"TRACK / CLK"++ button and move the ++"MENU ENCODER"++ to select the Free Clock, then click the encoder to activate it.

4. NGEN should now begin transmitting MIDI Notes to your instrument.

5. By default, NGEN will load ACDGEN as the [generator](generators.md) for [track #1](track.md) so you should hear a sequence being played on your instrument.

### 2 - Generating and Modifying Sequences Using ACDGEN

Now that NGEN is connected and transmitting MIDI notes to your instrument, let's see how to generate and modify sequences using the ACDGEN generator.

!!! Attention
      The first 3 sub-menus available in the **[Main Menu](menunavigation.md#main-menu)** (Generator, MIDI FX and Track) are related to the [selected track](track.md) while the other sub-menus contain global settings.

1. Return to the **[Main Menu](menunavigation.md#main-menu)** using the ++"RETURN"++ button and navigate to the **[Generator](generators.md) sub-menu**. This sub-menu contains all the parameters available for the active generator in the selected track (in this case, ACDGEN).
!!! note
      While in the Generator sub-menu, the NGEN displays the name of the active generator in the top-left corner and the selected track number in the right corner.
1. Use the ++"MENU ENCODER"++ to scroll through the **parameter list**. 
2. To modify the value of the selected parameter, **click the ++"MENU ENCODER"++** to select the value, scroll to adjust it, and click the encoder to return to the parameter selection.
3. The **main 4 parameters** of the active generator can also be accessed through the ** ++"PARAM 1-4"++ potentiometers** (except while in certain sub-menus). Additional 4 parameters can be accessed by holding the ++"FUNCTION"++ button and turning the ++"PARAM 1-4"++ potentiometers. More information about the behavior of the potentiometers can be found in the [Hardware Controls](hardwarecontrols.md#knobs) section.
4. To **generate** a new sequence, click the ++"GENERATE"++ button.

For more information about Generators, check the [Generators](generators.md) section.

### 3 - Activating a MIDI FX

Let's try adding a MIDI FX to the active track to modify the sequence generated by ACDGEN in real time.

1. From the [Main Menu](menunavigation.md#main-menu), navigate to the **[Track](track.md) sub-menu** to access the track's parameters. This sub-menu lets you activate/deactivate the track, select the active generator and MIDI FX, and adjust settings related to MIDI routing, clock division, and more.
2. Navigate to the **MIDI FX** parameter and click the ++"MENU ENCODER"++ to select the desired MIDI FX.
3. Scroll through the list of available MIDI FXs using the ++"MENU ENCODER"++, select the Glitch MIDI FX, and click the encoder to confirm.
4. Return to the **[Main Menu](menunavigation.md#main-menu)** and navigate to the **[MIDI FX](midifx.md) sub-menu** to access the parameters of the active MIDI FX.

!!! Attention
      While in the MIDI FX sub-menu, ++"PARAM 1-4"++ potentiometers control the parameters of the active MIDI FX as indicated by the knob icon on the top of the screen.

For more information about MIDI FXs, check the [MIDI FX](midifx.md) section.

### 4 - Adding More Tracks

Because NGEN is a multi-track sequencer, you can switch between tracks to edit their parameters and sequences.
Let's add a new track and configure it to output MIDI notes to Channel 2.

1. To open the track selector, click the ++"TRACK|CLK"++ button from the [Main Menu](menunavigation.md#main-menu) or any sub-menu.
2. Use the ++"MENU ENCODER"++ to scroll through the list of available tracks, select track #2, and click the encoder to confirm.
3. Use the shortcut ++"FUNCTION"++ + ++"TRACK"++ to jump to the **[Track](track.md) sub-menu**.
4. Only track 1 is active by default, so activate track 2 by scrolling to the **Active** parameter and clicking the ++"MENU ENCODER"++ to toggle it on.
5. Navigate to the **Generator** parameter and select a different generator for track 2.
6. By default, the 16 tracks available in NGEN are set to output MIDI notes to channels 1 through 16 sequentially. To access the parameters related to MIDI routing, clock division, and more, enable the **[Advanced Mode](settings.md)** in the **[Settings](settings.md)** / General page.

For more information about tracks, check the [Track](track.md) section.

### 5 - Using Patterns

NGEN allows you to create and store 8 patterns per project. In this section, you'll learn how to save and load patterns.

1. Click the ++"PATTERN"++ button to open the **[Pattern](pattern.md)** selector.
2. Use the ++"MENU ENCODER"++ to scroll through the list of available pattern slots.
3. To quickly save your active sequence to a pattern slot, press ++"FUNCTION"++ + ++"PATTERN"++.
4. To load a pattern, scroll to the desired pattern slot and click the ++"MENU ENCODER"++.
5. To access the pattern slot settings, click ++"FUNCTION"++ + ++"PATTERN"++ while in the pattern selector. This sub-menu lets you save, delete, copy and paste patterns.

For more information about patterns, check the [Pattern](pattern.md) section.

### 6 - Saving Your Project

In this final section, you'll learn how to save your project for future use.

!!! Attention
      Projects can be stored in the internal memory of NGEN or on an external microSD card. To save your project to the internal memory, ensure that the microSD card is not inserted.

1. Return to the **[Main Menu](menunavigation.md#main-menu)** and navigate to the **[Project](projects.md)** sub-menu.
2. Scroll to the **Save** parameter and click the ++"MENU ENCODER"++ to save your project.
3. Edit the project name using the ++"MENU ENCODER"++ and confirm.

For more information about projects, check the [Project](projects.md) section.

---


<div class="forced-pb"></div>

## Flow Diagram

The NGEN sequencing engine works by having a clock generator trigger the tracks' generators and MIDI FXs.

The notes generated by each track's generator and MIDI FX are routed to the track's main and auxiliary output. The MIDI output of all tracks is sent to external instruments via the USB and MIDI (A-style 1/8" jack) ports.

``` mermaid
graph LR
  A[CLOCK GENERATOR] --> B[TRACK 1] --> C[GENERATOR] --> D[MIDI FX] --> E[TRACK OUTPUT] -->|CH 1| F[USB / MIDI OUT];
  A-->G[TRACK 2] --> H[GENERATOR] --> I[MIDI FX] --> J[TRACK OUTPUT] -->|CH 2| F;
  A-->K[TRACK 3] --> L[GENERATOR] --> M[MIDI FX] --> N[TRACK OUTPUT] -->|CH 3| F;
```
