# Tips & Techniques

---

## About this section

NGEN can be used in a variety of different ways and this section is designed to help you get started with some of the most common techniques.

---

## Tips & Techniques


### Tips for Live Performance

Here's a list of some tips that can help you get the most out of NGEN when performing live:

#### Organizing your songs

One way to organize song ideas is by utilizing the 8 available patterns within each project to store distinct sections of a song. For instance, you can use pattern 1 for the intro, pattern 2 for the verse, pattern 3 for the chorus, and so on.

Additionally, projects can be used to store different songs. For example, you can use project 1 for song 1, project 2 for song 2, etc.

NGEN is capable of loading projects and patterns while playing so you can use this to switch between songs and sections of a song while performing. Switching between different projects and patterns is always done in sync with the clock and it's designed to be as smooth as possible.

#### Using shortcuts
NGEN includes several shortcuts that can help you during your performance. A list of all shortcuts can be found in the [Menu Navigation](menunavigation.md#shortcuts) section of the manual.

#### Using the Performance Mode

The [Performance Mode](perform.md) is a powerful tool for live performances. You can use it to control multiple parameters of different tracks at the same time.
You could use the Performance Mode, for example, to control the density, octave, and mode of multiple tracks at once. 

#### Using an external MIDI controller for NGEN

While NGEN may only feature 4 hardware knobs, it's possible to control most of its parameters and features via MIDI CC. This means that you can use an external MIDI controller to control NGEN's parameters and expand the number of real-time hardware controls available.

If you have a MIDI controller with a 3.5mm MIDI jack, you can connect it to NGEN's MIDI IN jack. Controllers with MIDI DIN jacks can be connected to NGEN via a MIDI cable and a DIN to 3.5mm (Type-A) adapter. 

Because NGEN works as a USB client, USB MIDI Controller can only be used with a separate USB Host device or a computer (that forwards the MIDI messages from the controller to NGEN).

A full list of NGEN's MIDI CC mappings can be found in the [MIDI Mapping](midimapping.md) section of the manual.

#### Automating parameter changes via MIDI CC

The MIDI CC mappings can also be used to automate parameter changes via a DAW or other MIDI-capable device. 
This can be used to perform programmatic/automatic changes to NGEN's parameters (such as Key and Scale) according to the needs of your performance.

### Combining Multiple Tracks for 1 Instrument

The standard workflow for NGEN is to utilize one track per instrument, but it's also possible to employ multiple tracks for the same instrument. This approach allows you to combine different Generators and MIDI FX to create more intricate and complex sequences.

To achieve this, simply set the Output Channel of all tracks to the same value. From there, you can use the second track to add or modify the notes generated by the first track.

Here's a list of some great combinations that we've found during our testing:

- [DRUMGEN](generators.md#drumgen) + [Samba](generators.md#samba): DrumGen can be used to sequence the main elements of your drum section (kick, snare, hihats) while Samba can sequence other percussive elements.

- [POP](generators.md#pop) + [Arper](generators.md#arper): In this combination, POP can be used to generate the main chord progression while Arper can be used to add a repeating arpeggio pattern on top of it.

- 2X [ACDGEN](generators.md#acdgen): Two ACDGEN tracks can be combined to create more intricate sequences. Try setting the 2 ACDGEN tracks to different algorithms and/or octaves for more interesting results.

Extra tips for combining multiple tracks:

- Use different clock rates for each track (1/16 and 1/8 for example).
- Explore contrasting settings for the generators. Use the available parameters to set different densities, octaves, and voicing modes (monophonic vs. polyphonic).
- Use MIDI FXs like the [Shaper](midifx.md#shaper) to control the velocity of the notes generated by each track.

### Using DRUMGEN and SAMBA to generate melodic sequences

[DrumGen](generators.md#samba) and [Samba](generators.md#samba) are primarily designed to sequence percussive instruments however it's also possible to use them to generate interesting polyphonic sequences. 
Use the Note 1 through 4 parameters to set them to any other 4-note chord.

The Note Length parameter in Samba allows you to switch between different length modes, which can have a significant impact when used with melodic instruments.

### Chaining MIDI FXs

While NGEN only allows one MIDI FX per track, it's possible to chain multiple MIDI FXs by using the Aux Output of a track and the [Thru](generators.md#thru) Generator.

To chain MIDI FXs, follow these steps:

- Select the track you'd like to chain MIDI FXs to.
- Set the MIDI FX of that track to the first MIDI FX you'd like to use.
- Set the Aux Output to another available track.
- Select the track that you set the Aux Output to and set its Generator to Thru.
- Set the MIDI FX of the Thru track to the next MIDI FX you'd like to use.

Repeat these steps for each MIDI FX you'd like to chain.

!!! warning "Attention"
    Keep in mind that each track will continue to output MIDI to the selected Output Channel so, to avoid sending duplicate MIDI messages, set the Output Channel of each track to a different value.

### Creating longer sequences

